* Welcome to the study of groups and their dynamics. The theories, research findings, definitions, case studies, examples, and figures that fill this book's pages have just one purpose: to describe and explain all things related to people and their groups. **Why do we join groups? What holds a group together? Do our groups change over time? How do groups influence us and how do we inflluence them? When does a group become a team? Why do some groups get so little done? What causes conflict in and between groups?** What are groups, and what are their essential qualities? These are just a few of the questions asked, explored, and answered in Group dynamics.
* Understanding people--why they think, feel, and act the way they do--require understanding their groups. Human behavior is so foten group behavior that people must be studied in context--embedded in their families, friendship cliques, teams, organizations, and so on--rather than in isolation. Understanding the social world--its politics, institutions, cultures, and conflicts--also requires understanding the intersecting and continually interacting groups that form society. Understanding yourself--why you think, feel, and act the way you do in any given situation--also requires understanding groups. In groups you define and confirm your values and beliefs and take on or refine your identity. When you face uncertain situations, you gain reassuring information about your problems and security in companionship in groups. You are most who you are when you are with others in groups.
* Understanding groups is also eminently practical. Much of the world's work is done by groups and teams, so efficiency, achievement, and progress--success itself--depend on understanding the strengths and weaknesses of groups. Productivity in the workplace, problem-solving in the boardroom, learning in the classroom, and even therapeutic change--all depend on group-level processes. Groups, too, hold the key to solve such societal problems as racism, sexism, and international conflict. Any attempt to change society will succeed only if the groups within that society change.

# Chapter 1: Introduction to Group Dynamics

## CHAPER OVERVIEW
* Groups come in all shape and sizes and their purposes are many and varied, but their influence is universal. The tendency to join with others in groups is perhaps the single most important characteristic of humans, and the processes that unfold within these groups leave an indeliable imprint on their members and on society. Yet, groups remain something of a mystery: unstudied at best, misunderstood at worst. This investigation into the nature of groups begins by answering two fundamental questions: What is a group and what are group dynamics?

```
* What are groups?
* What are the four basic types of groups?
* What distinguishes one group from another?
* What are group dynamics?
* Why study groups and their dynamics?
```

===

The Adventure Expedition: Group and Their Dynamics
* On May 10, 1996, just after midnight, the members of the Adventure Consultants Guide Expedition crawled from tends pitched high on Mt. Everest to begin the final leg of their journey to the top of the world. The group included ten clients who had paid hefty sum to join the expedition; guides who set the climbing lines, carried provisions, and helped climbers along the way; and Rob Hall, the team's leader. Hall was one of the most experienced high-altitude climbers in the world; he had scaled Everest four times before.
* The climb to the summit of Mr. Everest is a careful orchestrated undertaking. Teams begin the ascent in the middle of the night to 

SKIM

===

* Groups are always will be essential to huamn life. All cultures and eras we have lived, worked, thrived, and died in our families, tribes, communes, communities, and clans. Our ancestors protected themselves from dangers and disasters by joining together in groups. Early civilizations--the Aztecs, Persians, Greeks, and Romans--organized their societies by forming legions, assemblies, publics, legislatives, bodies, and trade associations. For time immemorial, people have gathered for civic and religious purposes, including worship, celebrations, and festivals.
* So why study these groups? The answer is not complicated: Groups hold the secret to the universe--the huamn universe, at any rate. the rare individual--the prisoner in solitary confinement, the recluse, the castaway--is isolated from all groups, but most of us belong to all manner of groups: from our small, close-knit groups such as families or very close friends to larger groups of associates and collegues at school or where we work, to the very large groups of people with whom we share an important quality that creates a psychological bond between us all. Given we spend our entire lives getting into, getting out of, and taking part in groups, it's best to not ignore them. Even better, it's better to understand them: to recognize their key features, to study the psychological and interpersonal processes that continually shape and reshape them, and to learn ways to help them function effectively.

## 1.1. WHAT ARE GROUPS?
* Fish swimming in synchronized unison are called a school. A gathering of kangaroos is a mob. A three-some of crows cawing from their perch on a telephone wire is a murder. A gam is a group of whales. A flock of larks in flight is an exaltation. But what is a collection of human beings called? A group.

```
What Groups Do You Belong To?
* Some may bemoan the growing alienation of individuals from the small social groups that once linked them securely to society-at-large, but the single man or woman who has no connection to other men and women is an extraordinary rare human being.
* Instruction: Most people belong to dozens of groups, but we can become so accustomed to them that their influence on us goes unnoticed. Before reading further, make a list (written or mental) of all the groups to which you belong.
* Interpretation: Did you include your family? The people you work or study with? How about your roommates, housemates, or classmates? All of the people you have friended on Facebook? How about people of your sex, race, and citizenship and those who share your political beliefs? Are African American men, Canadians, and Republicans groups? Are you in a romantic relationship? Did you include you and your partner on your list of groups? Some people lists are longer than others, but a list of 40 or more groups would not be unusual.
```

### 1.1a Defining Groups
* The Adventure Expedition was, in many respects, a unique collection of people facing an enormous challenge. Rob Hall, its leader, deliberately created the group by recruiting its 26 members; climbers, guides, cooks, medical staff, and so on. Its members were united in their pursuit of a shared goal, as is so often the case with groups, **but some of the members put their own personal needs above those of the group.** The members not only interacted with each other face-to-face in a physical space, but they also used technology to communicate with one another and with people who were not part of the team. But Adventure Expedition, although unique in many ways, was nonetheless a **group**: two or more individuals who are connected by and within social relationships.

* Two or More Individuals. Groups come in a staggering assortment of shapes and sizes, from dyads (two members) and triads (three members) to huge crowds, mobs, and assemblies. Sociologist John James was so intrigued by the variation in the size of groups that he took to the streets of Eugene and Portland, Oregon, to record the size of the 9,129 groups he encountered there. He defined a group to be two or more people in "face-to-face interaction as evidenced by the criteria of gesticulation, laugher, smiles, talk, play or work". He recorded pedestrians walking down the city streets, people shopping, children on playgrounds, public gatherings at sports events and festivals, patrons during the intermissions at plays and entering movie theaters, and various types of work crews and teams. Most of these groups were small, usually with only two or three members, but groups that had been deliberately created for some specific purpose, such as the leadership team of a company, tended to be larger. His findings, and the results of studies conducted in other settings (e.g., cafeterias, businesses), suggest that groups tend to "gravitate to the smallest size, two".

* Who Are Connected. Definitions of the word group are as varied as groups themselves, **but a commonality shared by many of these definitions is an emphasis on social relations that link members to one another.** Three persons working on math problems in separate rooms can hardly be considered a group; they are not connected to each other in any way. If, however, we create relationships between them--**for example, we let them send notes to each other or we pick one person to distribute the problems to the others--then these three individuals can be considered a rudimentary group.** Neither would we call people who share some superficial similarity, such as eye color, a favoriate football team, or birth date, group members for we expect them to be connected to each other in socially meaningful ways. A family is a group because the members are connected, not just by blood but also by social and emotional relationships. Adventure Expedition was a group because the members were linked by the tasks that they completed collectively and by friendships, alliances, responsibilities, and inevitable antagonisms.

* By and Within Social Relations. The relations that link the members of groups are not of one type. In families, for example, the relationships are based on kinship, but in the workplace, they are based on task-related interdependencies. In some groups, members are friends, but in others, the members are linked by common interests or experiences. Nor are the relationships linking members equally strong or enduring. Some relationships, like the links between members of a family or a clique of close friends, are tenacious, for they have developed over time and are based on a long history of mutual influence and exchange. In others, the ties between members may be so fragile that they are easily severed. Every individual member of the group does not need to be linked to every other person in the group. In the Adventure Expedition group, for example, some people were linked by all the other group members, but others had only a few friends in the group. In some cases, such as group based on ethnicity, race, or gender, the connection linking members may be more psychological than interpersonal. But no matter what the nature of the relations, a group exists when some type of bond links the members to one another and to the group itself.

```
What is a Group?
* No one definition can capture the many nuances of the word group. Some definers stress the importance of communication or mutual dependence. Still others suggest that a shared purpose or goal is what turns a mere aggregate of individuals into a bona fide group. Even the minimal number of members needed for a true group is debated, with some definitions requiring three members but others only two.

* Categorization: "Two or more individuals... who perceive themselves to be members of the same social category"

* Communication: "Three or more people... who think of themselves as a group, b) are interdependent (e.g., with regard to shared goals or behaviors that affect one another), and c) communicate (interact) with one another (via face-to-face or technological means)

* Influence: "Two or more persons who are interacting with one another in such a manner that each person influences and is influenced by each other person."

* Interdependence: "A dynamic whole based on interdependence rather than similarity".

* Interrelation: "An aggregation of two or more people who are to some degree in dynamic interrelation with one another.

* Psychological significance: "A psychological group is any number of people who interact with each other, are psychologically aware of each other, and perceive themselves to be in a group"

* Relations: "Individuals who stand in certain relations to each other, for example, as sharing a common purpose or having a common intentionality, or acting together, or at least having a common interest"

* Shared identity: "Two or more people possessing a common social identification and whose existence as a group is recognized by a third party"

* Shared tasks and goals: "Three or more people who work together interdependently or an agree-upon activity or goal.

* Size "Two or more people"

* Social unit: "Persons who recognize that they constitute a meaningful social unit, interact on that basis, and are committed to that social unity" 

* Structure: "A social unit which consists of a number of individuals who stand in (more or less) definite status and role relationship to one another and which possess a set of values or norms of its own regulating the behavior of individual members, at least in matters of consequence to the group"

* System: "An intact social system, complete with boundaries, interdependence for some shared purpose, and differentiated member roles"

```

### 1-1b Varieties of Groups
* No one knows for certain how many groups exist at this moment, but given the number of people on the planet and their groupist proclivities, 30 billion in a conservate estimate. Groups are so numerous that the differences among them are as noteworthy as their similarities. Figure 1.1 brings some order to this challenging miscellany by distinguishing between four types of groups: primary groups, social groups, collectives, and categories.

* Primary Groups. Sociologist Charles Horton Cooley labeled the small intimate clusters of close associates, such as families, good friends, or cliques of peers, primary groups. These groups profoundly influence the behavior, feelings, and judgment of their members, for members spend much of their time interacting with one another, usually in face-to-face settings with many of hte other members present. Even when the group is dispersed, members nonetheless feel they are still "in" the group, and they consider the group to be a very important part of their lives.
* In many cases, individuals become part of primary groups involuntarily: Every member of Adventure Expedition was born into a family that provided for their well-being until they could venture out to join other groups. Other primary groups form when people interact in significant, meaningful ways for a prolonged period of time. For example, and unlike Adventure Expedition, some climbing teams have summited so many mountains on so many expeditions that these groups are more like families than expeditions. They "continue, with more or less the same people in them, for a very long time", and affect the members' lives in significant and enduring ways.  They are broad rather than limited in their scope.
* Gooley considered such groups to be primary because they transform individuals into social beings. Primary groups protect members from harm, care for them when they are ill, and provide them with shelter and sustenance, but as Cooley explained, they also create the connection between the individual and society at large:

        They are primary in several senses, but chiefly in that they are fundamental in forming the social nature and ideals of the individual. The result of intimate association, psychologically, is a certain fusion of individualities in a common whole, so that one's very self, for many purposes at least, is the common life and purpose at least, is the cokmmon life and purpose of the group. Perpaps the simplest way of describing this wholeness is by saying that it is a "we"

* *Social (Secondary) Groups* In earlier eras, people lived most of their lives in primary groups that were clustered together in relatively small tribes or communities. But, as societies became more complex, so did our groups. We began to associate with a wider range of people in less intimate, more public settings, and **social groups** emerged to structure these interactions. Social groups are larger and more formally organized than primary groups, and memberships tend to be shorter in duration and less emotionally involving. Their boundaries are also more permeable, so members can leave old groups behind and join new ones, for they do not demand the level of commitment that primary groups do. People usually belong to a very small number of primary groups, but they can enjoy membership in a variety of social groups. Various terms have been used to describe this category of groups, such as *secondary groups*, *associations*, *task groups*, and *Gesellchaften*.
* Social groups, such as the Adventure Expedition, military squads, governing boards, construction workers, teams, crews, fraternaties, sororities, dance troupes, orchestras, bands, ensembles, classes, clubs, secretarial pools, congregations, study groups, guilds, task forces, committees, and meetings, are extremely common. When surveyed, 35.7% of American reported they belong to some type of religious group (e.g., congregation) and 20.0% said they belong to a sports team or club. The majority, ranging from 50% to 80% reported doing things in groups, such as attending a sports event together, visiting one another for the evening, sharing a meal together, or going out as a group to see a movie. People could dine, watch movies, and travel singly, but most do not: They prefer to perform these activities in social groups. Americans are above average in their involvement in voluntary associations, but some countries' citizens--the Dutch, Canadians, Scandinavians--are groupier still.

* **Collectives** Some groups come into existence when people are drawn together by something--an event, an activity, or even danger--but then the group dissolves when the experience ends. Any gathering of individuals can be considered a **collective**, but most theorists reserve the term for larger, less intricately interconnected associations among people. A list of examples of collectives would include crowds watching a building burn, audiences seated in a movie theater, line (queues) of people waiting to purchase tickets, gathering of college students protesting a government policy, and panicked mobs fleeing from danger. But the list would also include social movements of individuals who, though disperse over a wide area, display common shifts in opinion or actions. **The members of collectives are joined by their common interest or shared actions, but they often owe little allegiance to the group. In many cases, such groups are created by happenstance, convenience, or a short-lived expereience, and so the relations joining the members are so transitory that they dissolve as soon as the mmembers separate.

===

Are People Bowling Alone?
* The numbers tell the tale. In 1975, people reported playing card games together, like poker and bridge, about 14 times a year. By 2000, that number had been halved. In the 1970, 50% of the people surveyed agreed that their family usually eats dinner together. By the end of the century, only about 33% reported regaular family meals and the family vacation was also becoming rarer. Today fewer people report visiting with neighbors frequently and they are less likely to join social clubs, such as the Kiwanis and garden clubs. As the political scientist Robert Putnam 

SKIM

===

* **Categories** A **social category** is a collection of individuals who are similar to one another in some way. For example, citizens of Ireland are Irish, Americans whose ancestors were from Africa are African Americans, and men who are sexually attracted to other men are gay. If a category has no social implications, then it only describes individuals who share a feature in common. If, however, these categories set in motion personal or interpersonal processes--if someone celebrities St. Patrick's Day because of his Irish heritage, if people respond to a woman differently when they see she is an African American, or if a gay man identifies with other LGBTQ persons--then a category may be transformed into a highly influential group.
* As social psychologist Henri Tajfel explained, members of the same social category often share a common identity with one another. They know who is in their category, who is not, and what qualities are typical of insiders and outsiders. This perception of themselves as members of the same group of social category--this **social identity**--is "that part of an individual's self concept which derives from his knowledge of his membership of a social group (or groups) together with the emotional significance attached to that membership"
* But social categories can also influence the perceptions of people who are not part of the category. When perceivers decide a person they encounter is one of "those people", they will likely rely on any **sterotypes** they have about the members of that social caegory to formulate an impression of the person. Social categories tend to create divisions between people, and those divisions can result in a sense of we and us versus they and them.

## 1-1c Characteristics of Groups
* Each one of the billions of groups that exist at this moment is a unique configuration of individuals, processes, and relationships. The Adventure Expedition mountaineering group, for example differed in a hundred ways from the other teams of climbers on Mt. Everest that season. But all groups, despite their uniqueness, share some common features. Some of these features, such as the size of the group and the task they are attempting, are relatively obvious ones. Other qualities, such as the group's cohesiveness or the permeability of the group's boundaries, must be uncovered, for they are often overlooked, even by the group members themselves.

* **Composition: Who Belongs to the Group?** To understand a group, we must know something about the group's composition: the qualities of the individuals who are members of the group. The Adventure Expedition team, for example, differed from the other teams on Mt. Everest that year because each member of that group was a unique individual with specific talents, weaknesses, attitudes, values, and personality traits. Hall, the group's leader, was a world-class high altitude climber. Andy Harris, a guide, was outgoing, physically fit, and passionate about climbing, but he had never been to Mr. Everest before. Beck Weathers, Frank Fischbeck, and Lou Kasischke were all clients: Weathers was "garrulous" Fischlbeck was "dapper" and "gentell", and Kaischeke was tall and athletic.
* Groups may be more than the sum of their parts but each part defines the whole. A group with a member who is naturally boisterous, mean-spirited, hard-working, chill, or close-minded will be different from the group with a member who is domineering, self-sacrificing, lazy, anxious, or creative. A group with many members who have only just joined will differ fromm one with mostly long-term, veteran members. A group whose members differ from each other in terms of race, sex, economic background, and country of origin will differ from a group with far less diversity. Were we to assign 100 people to twenty 5-person groups, each group would differ from every other group because it joins together 5 unique individuals.

* **Boundaries: Who Does NOT Belong?** The relationships that link members to one another define who is in the group and who is not. **A group is boundaried in a psychological sense; those who are included in the group are recognized as members and those who are not part of the group are excluded outsiders.** In some cases, these boundaries are publicly acknowledged: Both members and nonmembers know who belongs to an honor society, a rock band, or a baseball team. **But in other cases, the boundaries may be indistinct or or known only to the group members themselves.** A secret society, for example, may not reveal its existence or its membership list to outsiders. A group's boundary may also be relatively permeable. In *open groups*, for example, membership is fluid; members may voluntarily come and go as they please with no consequences (and they often do), or the group may frequently vote members out of the group or invite new ones to join. In closed groups, in contrast, the membership roster changes more slowly, if at all. but, regardless of the reasons for membership fluctuations, open groups are especially unlikely to reach a state of equilibrium since members recognize that they may lose or relinguish their place within the group at any time. Members of such groups, especially those in which membership is dependent on voting or meeting a particular standard, are more likely to monitor the actions of others. In contrast, clsoe groups are often more cohesive as competition for membership is irrelevant and group members anticipate future collaobrations. Thus, in closed groups, individuals are more likely to focus on the collective nature of the group and to identify with the group.

* **Size: How large is the Group?** Jon Krakauer, who chronicled the experiences of Adventure Expedition as it attempted its climb of Mr. Everest, admitted he was unsettled by the size of the group: "I'd never climbed as a member of such a large group... all my previous expeditions had been undertaken with one or two trusted friends, or alone".
* A group's size influences many of its other features, for a small group will likely have different structures, processes, and patterns of interaction than a larger one. A two-person group is so small that it ceases to exist when one member leaves, and it can never be broken down into subgroups. **The member of dyads (e.g., best friends, lovers) are sometimes linked by strong emotional bonds that make their dynamics so intense that they belong in a categry all their own**. Larger groups can also have unique qualities, for the members are rarely connected directly to all other members, subgroups are very likely to form, and one or more leaders may be needed to organize and guide the group.
* A group's size also determines how many social ties--link, relationships, connections, edges--are needed to join members to each other and to the group. The maximum number of ties within a group in which everyone is linked to everyone else is given by the equation n(n-1)/2, where n is the numbero fpeople in the group. Only one relationship is needed to create a dyad, but as Figure 1.2 illustrates, the number of ties needed to connect all members grow as the group gets larger. Three relationships would be needed to join each member of three-person group, but six, ten, and fifteen relationships are needed to link the members of four-, five-, and six-person groups. Even larger groups require even more ties. For example, a group the size of the Adventure Expedition (26 members) would require 325 ties to completely link each member to every other member.
* Because of the limits of most people's capacity to keep track of so many social relationships, once the group surpasses about 150 individuals, members usually can not connect with each and every member of the group. In consequence, in larger groups, members are connected to one another indirectly rather than directly. Beck Weathers might, for eample, be linked to guide Mike Groom, and Groom might establish a bond with Jon Krakauer, but Weathers may not get to know Krakauer. In even larger groups, members may only feel connected to the group as a whole, or to subgroups within the larger group. Larger groups are more schismatic than smaller ones; they are more easily break up into smaller groups.

* **Interactions: What Do Members Do?** Groups are the settings for an infinite variety of interpersonal actions. If we were to watch a group for even a few minutes, we would see people doing all sort of things: talking over issues, getting into arguments, and making decisions. They would upset each other, give each other help and support, and take advantage of each other's weaknesses. **They would likely work together to accomplish difficult tasks, find ways to not do their work, and even plot against the best interests of those who are not a part of their group.** Many of the most interesting, influential and entertaining forms of human action are possible only when people join with others in a group.
* Sociologist Robert Freed Bales intrigued by the question **"What do people do when they are in groups" spent years watchjing and recording people in relatively small, face-to-face groups.** He recognized the diversity of group interaction, but eventually concluded that the countless actions he had observed tend to be of two types: **those that focused on the task the group was dealing with and those that sustained, strengthened, or weakened interpersonal relationships within the group**. **Task interaction** includes all group behavior that is focused principally on the group's work, projects, plans, and goals. In most groups, members must coordinate their various skills, resources, and motivations so that the group can make a decision, generate a product, or achieve a victory. When a jury reviews each bit of testimony, a committee discusses the best course of action to take, or the Aventure Expedition plans the approach they will take to the summit, the group's interaction is task-focused.
* But groups are not simply performance engines, for much of what happens in a group is **relationship interaction** (or socioemotional interaction). If group members falter and need support, others will buoy them up with kind words, suggestions, and other forms of help. When group members disagree with others, they are often roundly criticized and make to feel foolish. When a coworker wears a new suit or outfit, others in his or her work unit notice it and offer compliment or criticisms. Such actions sustain or undermind the emotional bonds linking the members to one another and to the group. We will review the method that Bales developed for objectively recording these types of interactions,, Interaction Process Analysis (IPA), in chapter 2.

* **Interdependence: Do the Members Depend on Each Other?** The acrobat on the trapeze drops to the net unless her teammate catches her outstretched arms. The assembly line worker is unalbe to complete his work until he receives the unfinished product from a worker further up the line. The business executive's success and salary are determined by how well her staff complete their work; if her staff fail, then she fails as well. In such situations, members are obligated or responsible to other group members, for they provide each other with support and assistance. This **interdependence** means that members depend on one another; their outcomes, actions, thoughts, feelings, and experiences are partially determined by others in the group.
* Some groups create only the potential for interdependence among members. The outcomes of people standing in a queue at a store's checkout counter, audience members in a darkened theater, or the congregation of a large mega-church are hardly interwined at all. The individuals within these groups can reach their goals on their own without making certain their actions mesh closely with the actions of those who are nearby. **Other groups, such as gangs, families, sports teams, and military squads, create far higher levels of interdependency since members reliably and substantially influence one another's outcomes over a long period of time and in a variety of situations. But even the interdependencies in these tightly meshed groups are rarely invariant or undifferentiated. As Figure 1.3 suggested, in symmetric groups with a flat, nonhierarachical structure, the influence among members is equal and reciprocal (Figure 1.3 a). But more typically interdepencies are asymmetric, unequal, and hierarchical. In a business, for example, the boss may determine how employees spend their time, what kind of rewards they experience, and even the duration of their membership in the group (Figure 1.3b). In other cases, the employees may be able to influence their boss to a degree, but the boss influences them to a much greater extent (Figure 1.3c). Interdependency can also be ordered sequentially, as when C's outcomes are determined by B's actions, but B's actions are determined by A.

* **Structure: How Is the Group Organized?** Group members are not connected to one another at random, but in organized and predictable patterns. In all but the most ephemeral groups, patterns and regularities emerge that determine the kinds of actions that are permitted or condemned: who talks to whom, who likes whom and who dislikes whom, who can be counted on to perform particular tasks, and whom others look to for guidance and help. These regularities combine to generate **group structure**--the complex of roles, norms, and intermember relations that organizes the group. **Roles** specify the general behavior expected of people who occupy different positions within the group. The roles of *leader* and *follower* are fundamental ones in many groups, but other roles--information seeker, information giver, and compromiser--may emerge in any group. Group members' actions and interactions are also shaped by the group's **norms** that describe what behaviors should and should not be performed in a given comtext.
* Roles, norms, and other structural aspect of groups, although unseen and often unnoticed, lie at the heart of their most dynamic proceses. When people join a group, they initially spend much of their time trying to come to terms with the requirements of their role. If they can not meet with the role's demand, they might not remain a member for long. Norms within a group are defined and renegotiated over time, and conflicts often emerge as members violate norms. In group meetings, the opinions of members with higher status carry more weight than those of the rank-and-file members. When several members form a subgroup within the larger group, they exert more influence on the rest of the group than they would individually. When people manage to place themselves at the hub of the group's information-exchange patterns, their influence over others also increases.
* If you had to choose only one aspect of a group to study, you would probably learn the most by studying its structure. The Adventure Expedition's structure, for example, improved the group's overall efficiency, but at a cost. When researchers surveyed expert mountain climbers asking them to evaluate t he wisdom of hiking in a team with a clear chain-of-command versus one with a less leader-centered culture, these experts favorted a hierarchical structure for its efficiency. However, they also warned that such groups were not as safe as groups that were more egalitarian, since members were less likely to share information about threats and concerns. These researchers then confirmed the experts' prognosis by examining the records of 5,104 group expeditions in the Himalayas. Sure enough, more climbers reached the top of the summit when they hiked in a teams with these groups during the expedition. The researchers concluded: "Hierarchy, structurally and as a cultural value, can both help and hurt team performance".

* **Goals: What Is the Group's Purpose?** Humans, as a species, seem to be genetically ready to set goals for themselves--"What natural selection has built into us is the capacity to strive, the capacity to seek, the capacity to set up short-term goals in the service of longer-term goals"--and that tendency is only amplified in groups. A study group wants to help members get better grades. A jury makes a decision about guilt or innocence. The members of a congregation seek religious and spiritual experiences. The team Rob Hall created, the Adventure Expedition, pursued its goals relentlessly and, for some members, fatally. The groups Bales studied spent the majority of their time (63%) dealing with goal-related activities and tasks. The members of groups pursue their own goals, but because their goals are interdependent, group and group-level goals.
* The goals group pursue are many and varied. One approach to their classification suggests that a broad distinction can be made between intellectual and judgmental tasks. Another emphasizes three different categories: production, discussion, and problem-solving goals. A third model, proposed by social psychologist Joseph E. McGrath, distinguishes among four basic group goals: generating ideas or plans, choosing a solution, negotiating a solution to a conflict, or executing (performing) a task. As Figure 1.4 indiciates, each of these basic categories can be further subdivided, yielding a total of eight goal-related activities.

* *Generating*: Groups concoct the strategies they will use to accomplish their goals (Type 1: planning tasks) or create altogether new ideas and approaches to their problems (Type 2: creativity tasks)
* Choosing: Groups make decisions about issues that have correct solutions (Type 3: intellective tasks) and questions that can be answered in many ways *Type 4: decision-making tasks)
* Negotiating: Group resolve differences of opinion among members regarding their goals or decisions (Type 5: cognitive conflict tasks) or settle competitive disputes among members (Type 6: mixed-motive tasks)
* Executing: Groups do things, including taking part in competitions (Type 7: contests/battles/competitive tasks) or creating some product or carrying out collective actions (Type 8: performances/psychomotor tasks)

* McGrath's task circumplex model also distinguishes between conceptual-behavioral tasks and cooperation-conflict tasks. Groups dealling with conceptual tasks (Type 2-5) generally exhibit high levels of information exchange, social influence, and process-oriented activity. Groups dealing with behavioral tasks (Type 1, 6, 7, 8) are those that produce things or perform services. Members of these groups perform a series of motor tasks that range from the simple abnd relative individualistic through to the complex and highly interdependent. Conflict tasks (Type 4-7) pit individuals and groups against each other, whereas cooperative tasks require collaboration (Type 1-3, and 8). Some group perform tasks from nearly all of the McGrath's categories, whereas others concentrate on only one subset of goals.

* **Origin: Founded or Formed?** Groups tend to fall naturally into two categories: planned groups, which are deliberately formed by its members or 

page 13